A few weeks ago, Google announced this
new research called Turbo Quan, claiming
that their new compression algorithm is
capable of reducing LM's KV cache memory
usage by up to six times and achieving
up to eight times speed up. This
headline itself is huge, reaching up to
38,000 likes. Because if Turbo Quin is
applied, at least for Google, they get
to free up around 83% of the total
memory that existing hardware was
occupied with, which some would say led
to the crash of AI chip stocks with
prices of 32 GB DDR5 being down at least
30%. So, in a way, Turbo Quant to Micron
stocks is like Deep Seek to Nvidia
stocks last year, as Micron is the one
that makes the memory that AI uses the
most. But there is just a bit of a
problem. Turbo Quant is not being
advertised in good faith, while Deep
Seek V3 is genuinely a breakthrough that
people kind of misunderstood its impact.
Like this eight times speed up claim
alone in this title is already pretty
dramatic and even a bit problematic
because if you take a closer look at
this eight times speed up claim, it is
being compared to a baseline that no one
uses in practice. They are comparing
4bit against 32bit unquantized baseline.
So of course on paper that gives you the
cleanest tell line imaginable because
32-bit down to 4bit is exactly an 8:1
reduction in data movement. So if your
bottleneck is just moving data through
memory then of course you can just say
up to eight times in the best case. But
that is a very different statement from
saying the method makes real LM
inference eight times faster because in
practice modern LM inference does not
usually use 32 bits in the first place.
So Google definitely made the
improvement sound more groundbreaking
than it actually is. The real question
should be how much better is turbo quan
than the baselines people already use
which they did not answer anywhere in
the blog nor their paper. It's kind of
like saying oh I run 100 times faster
than a toddler. It's like what's even
the point? You should at least compare
yourself to someone like Usain Bolt. But
I am not saying Turboquin is a bad
paper. In fact, they do have a lot of
great contributions when you look beyond
their marketing tactics. But before we
dive into it, if you're building AI
agents, you have probably noticed a
recurring problem. Prototyping is really
easy, but making them reliable and
consistent in production often requires
painful rewriting of the project from
scratch. Unexpected things that never
happen locally, such as orchestration
failures, tool close timeout, or rate
limits, just spawn. And that's exactly
where ingests comes in. Ingest is a
durable execution platform. It shifts
the fault tolerant work from system
engineering into back-end code that you
can actually ship. So your critical
logic keeps running across failures or
longtime windows without turning your
app into an infrastructure project. With
how AI agents early challenges like
hallucination and safety were managed
through many workarounds like
orchestration patterns, human in loop
tool calling and reasoning. These also
introduce multiple points of failure
that ingests durable execution is
uniquely positioned to address. You
would get automatic state persistence,
intelligent retries, and workflow
resumption. So your agent doesn't just
fail and restart. It continues from
where it left off. Inest would basically
act as the AI agent harness for you. So
you can make sure that your agents are
always production ready. For instance,
they manage human in the loop with a
durable suspension where your agent can
pause for approval for hours or days
then continue without losing context. In
their latest release called durable
endpoints, you can use ingest's
durability API directly inside your
existing API endpoint. So, your
prototype is production ready from day
one without having to set up workflows
or go through that classic two-stage
process of building something fast and
brittle, then slowing down later to
rebuild it for reliability. What's even
better is that they have a pretty nice
free plan, too, with up to 50,000
executions per month. So, if you're
building agents and want reliability and
good AI harness, definitely check them
out using the link down description. And
thank you, Injest, for sponsoring this
video. Anyways, you have probably seen a
lot of glazing videos talking about how
gamechanging Turbo Quan is. So this
video will be more like a reality check
to ground it as much as I can. This
paper was actually first published
nearly a year ago. So as Google
advertised that is still a relatively
new technique. But to understand turbo
quant you first need to understand what
it is actually compressing. In a
transformer's attention mechanism every
token is converted into a key vector
which is then stored in the KV cache
along with a corresponding value vector
that contains the actual information to
be retrieved later. So as more tokens
are processed, the model keeps all these
past key vectors in memory and when you
need that key again, you don't need to
recomputee it as it is saved. Then when
a new token aka a query comes in, the
model compares it against all previous
tokens by computing doc products between
its query vector and every stored key
vector. So the KV cache becomes a
continuously growing table of vectors
where each stored vector represents a
past token and every new token is
evaluated against all of them to
determine how strongly they are related.
And this implies two things. First is
that these vectors take up a lot of
memory because you store a new vector
for every token which will expand it
linearly and they all have to be stored
to save compute. Second, the dot
productducts between vectors must remain
accurate because they directly determine
how much each pass token influences the
current one. And this is exactly where
compression becomes difficult because if
you compress these vectors too
aggressively, you don't just lose
information, you specifically distort
the relationships between tokens, which
is what the model actually relies on. So
Turbocoin is designed around a very
specific goal. It is not just trying to
compress vectors. Well, in general, it
is trying to compress them in a way that
keeps their dot products correct while
still using as few bits as possible. And
the major part of this paper is to find
the sweet spot. And they basically
achieved it by breaking the problem into
two major steps where each step removes
one specific difficulty. The first step
is to deal with the fact that these
vectors are highly structured. Since
different dimensions behave differently,
some directions carry more signals than
others and many dimensions are
correlated. If you try to compress this
directly, it wouldn't work because the
vector is not uniform across its
dimensions as some dimensions carry much
more signal than others as some are
almost noise and many of them are
correlated. So the information is
unevenly distributed. And if you apply a
simple compression scheme directly like
quantizing each coordinate the same way,
you would waste bits on dimensions that
don't matter much while not allocating
enough precision to the important ones
which is very inefficient. On top of
that, the relationships between vectors
get distorted in unpredictable ways. Dot
products depend on how all dimensions
interact together. So even small errors
in the wrong directions can change which
tokens are considered more related. And
since different dimensions contribute
differently, a uniform compression
scheme does not preserve these
relationships well. But instead of
trying to design a more complicated
compression scheme to handle all the
structure, turbo quant does something
much simpler. It applies a random
rotation to the vector. So it removes
the structure. This idea was first
introduced in polar quant which also has
the same author as turbo quant where if
you first apply a random transformation
to a vector, you can reshape its
distribution into a much more regular
form. This simply redistributes the
information across all dimensions while
not removing information or changing the
meaning of the vector. So, Turbo Quant
further applied this idea which means
now a simple uniform compression scheme
can be used. Then once the vector has
been rotated, every coordinate behaves
similarly and carries roughly the same
amount of information. This does not
distort existing information because the
rotation is invertible and preserves
dotproducts. So all relationships
between tokens remain exactly the same
just expressed in a different coordinate
system. Which means now the problem of
compressing a highdimensional vector
essentially reduces to compressing a
bunch of independent one-dimensional
values. So Turbocoin can just apply an
optimal scalar quantization method that
would minimize reconstruction error. And
because the rotation made the data
uniform, this simple approach would be
the best possible compression you can
achieve. Even though this step
reconstructs the vector well overall
there is still a subtle issue.
Minimizing reconstruction error does not
guarantee that dot products remain
accurate. What I mean is that even if
the compressed vector looks very close
to the original the way it interacts
with other vectors which is what
attention actually uses can still be
slightly off which is a huge problem. So
this is where step two comes in. After
quantization we compute what was lost
which is the difference between the
original vector and the compressed
version. As this remaining error is much
smaller than the original vector, this
can be stored very efficiently. But
instead of actually storing it
precisely, Turboin applies another
random projection and keeps only the
sign of each component which uses just
one bit per dimension. And this idea was
also from one of their earlier papers
called QJL. And they found that even
with just the sign information, it
allows you to recover an unbiased
estimate of dot products. What this
means is that even though each value is
extremely compressed, the dot product
will still be correct on average. Like
for a single computation, it might be
slightly off, but across dimensions, the
errors cancel out. So it stays centered
around the true value thanks to the
rotation that spreads all dimensions
evenly. So that's why with just one bit
per dimension and summing over many of
them still gives a correct estimate on
average and would make the dot product
calculation much more accurate. So this
is the core idea as to how Turbo Quan
can compress KV cache from something
like 16 bits per value down to around
2.5 to 4 bits while still keeping the
model's behavior intact. As for the
trade-off for accuracy, they found that
at around 3.5 bits per value, the
compression is essentially quality
neutral, meaning the model behaves
almost identically to full precision.
But if you push it further down to
around 2.5 bits, you would start to see
some degradation, but it is still
relatively small compared to the amount
of memory saved. And keep in mind this
compression is mainly applied to the key
vector and the precision of dotproduct
for the query key calculation. So to
fact check about the 16th memory
savings, where does that number come
from? Well, first of all, the memory
savings is only applied to the KV cache.
This means the model weights would still
take up the same amount of space. It's
just the cost would be cheaper when the
context window grows. As for the actual
numbers, the baseline is once again not
something fitting for the current actual
LMS in production, but a theoretical
baseline that lacks optimization. So it
likely comes from comparing the usual
16- bit KV cache against the turbo coin
at around 2.5 bits per value. So if you
divide 16 by 2.5 bit, you get around 6.4
times memory savings or 16 divided by
3.5 bits, you get around 4.5 times
memory savings. Not to mention the
graphs here they use to compare is a
method published back in 2024 like the
KV paper baseline or just a full KV
cache. While it is not some sort of
graph crime, it does feel a bit heavily
narrated in a direction. Not to mention,
this is only applying to the KV cache
and not the model weights. On top of
that, on the other graph where they are
comparing Turbo Quant against other
research baselines, a lot of problems
got pointed out by the community. So,
here's the thing. When there is a
similar research paper that was
published much earlier than yours, what
should a reasonable scientific study do?
discuss it, try to reproduce it, and
maybe even make it into a baseline.
Well, here's the problem with the first
version of Turbo Quant. So, there is
this very similar technique called
Rabbit Q published one year earlier that
also incorporates the rotation method
and shares their implemented C++
optimization openly. But due to some
sort of reasons, Turboan authors had to
port it to Python and in that ported
version, it does not support multi
thread. So, they ran the baseline of
Rabbit Q on a CPU and ran Turboquin on
an E100. Though of course the difference
with the prior methods would have a huge
difference because not only is the
baseline not being compared fairly, it
is also running on two completely
different hardware basically providing
no value in this comparison. What's a
bit more absurd is that they dismissed
about rabbit Q in the paper without any
reason to calling it suboptimal without
actually fully reading their appendex of
plasian studies as they have admitted in
their latest comment on open review
which is pretty nuts. So, it just
doesn't seem like research was done in
completely good faith, especially when
the original Rabbit Q author has already
reached out to them multiple times to
try to get them to clarify their
findings. Well, there are still more
issues surrounding the paper, but I
think you probably already got the
point. And the Turbo Quan authors did
promise they will improve the paper in
their latest comments regarding these
issues. So, the news of Turbo Quan
posted by Google could likely be a media
stunt or misdirection, unless a
technique that was published a year ago
still counts as something new to Google.
Or maybe they're just promoting it
because this is only recently accepted
into iClar 2026. But once again, looking
at this one peer review comment they got
which gave this paper a 10 out of 10
while other reviewers are giving it like
a four [snorts] and a six is definitely
awkward. But anyways, I am just
speculating at this point. But this sort
of optimization at KV cache level is not
something new and every company that
serves LLM definitely uses some sort of
quantizations there. So no, nothing
crazy revolutionary about AI is
discovered and everyone has already been
maxing the compression efficiency in
their own ways. Maybe Google was able to
improve a bit of their memory
efficiency, but to able to free up at
least 83% of memory on top of the
current state-of-the-art methods in this
economy, it's pretty much impossible.
especially when they didn't even open
source any codes. So, your AI chip
stocks are safe and you can see how it
bounced back a few days later already.
And even if 83% memory saving exists, it
just means more tokens will be consumed
because we are entering an economy of
intelligence. And again, this
compression technique wouldn't change
the amount of memory you need to hold a
model in the GPU. So, yeah, that's it
for this video. And if you like how I
explained the AI concepts today, you
should definitely check out my latest
project, intuitive.academy, Academy
where it contains an intuitive
explanation of all modern LMS from the
ground up ranging from LM architectures
Laura to howes work. A total of 24
chapters are currently available and
will be updated monthly. This is the
start of a series where I'll break down
AI topics intuitively because I
genuinely think anyone could understand
them no matter how difficult it may
seem. So for those who want to get into
AI or LMS, this should be the perfect
place for you to dive into the technical
parts without being intimidated by crazy
looking maths. And right now I am also
putting out a new launch discount for
2026. So you can use the code early for
40% off a yearly plan. And thank you
guys for watching. A big shout out to
Spam Match, Chris Ladoo, Degan, Robert
Zaviasa, Marcelo Ferraria, Proof and Enu
DX Research Group, Alex Midwest Maker,
and many others that support me through
Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on Twitter
if you haven't and I'll see you in the
next